Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a common disorder with a lifetime prevalence of 16.2% and the fourth highest cause of disability globally. It is hypothesized to be a syndromatic manifestation of multiple pathological processes leading to similar clinical manifestation. MDD is associated with at least three categories of peripheral hormone-type factors including neurotrophic factors, proinflammatory cytokines, and processes that impair regulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical axis. Neuroimaging studies have identified functional abnormalities including subcortical systems associated with reward and emotion processing, medial prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortical regions and the lateral prefrontal cortical systems involved in cognitive control and voluntary emotion regulation. Studies investigating the effects of psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy on functional brain measures show normalization of brain function with return to euthymia. Nevertheless, approximately 50% of patients with MDD will not respond sufficiently and 60 to 70% will not achieve full remission with first-line pharmacotherapy, therefore clinicians strive to improve patient responses through the use of adjunct therapies. This review discusses recent research in the various biological processes associated with MDD as well as recent data in support of the use of adjunctive non-pharmacological therapies including psychotherapy, bibliotherapy, Internet therapy, "natural" or herbal approaches, exercise therapy, and somatic therapies. 
This article is intended to identify some of the most important challenges faced by family physicians when treating MDD and to provide practical solutions. Key issues, reviewed from a primary care view point will include: treating to remission (and not just response), identification of high-risk groups, diagnosis, acute treatment approaches (including pharmacotherapy and the management of related side effects), the use of psychotherapy and somatic therapies, assessment of the adequacy of treatment including the assessment of remission, response measurement, optimal follow-up care throughout the phase of treatment, the key components of patient education and strategies for partial/limited response to the first-line antidepressant (switching, augmentation and combination strategies), how to provide support for improved treatment adherence, and approaches to prevent the recurrence of depressive episodes. 
Major depressive disorder (MDD) is highly disabling and typically runs a recurrent course. Knowledge about prevention of relapse and recurrence is crucial to the long-term welfare of people who suffer from this disorder. This article provides an overview of the current evidence for the prevention of relapse and recurrence using psychological interventions. We first describe a conceptual framework to preventive interventions based on: acute treatment; continuation treatment, or; prevention strategies for patients in remission. In brief, cognitive-behavioral interventions, delivered during the acute phase, appear to have an enduring effect that protects patients against relapse and perhaps others from recurrence following treatment termination. Similarly, continuation treatment with either cognitive therapy or perhaps interpersonal psychotherapy appears to reduce risk for relapse and maintenance treatment appears to reduce risk for recurrence. Preventive relapse strategies like preventive cognitive therapy or mindfulness based cognitive therapy (MBCT) applied to patients in remission protects against subsequent relapse and perhaps recurrence. There is some preliminary evidence of specific mediation via changing the content or the process of cognition. Continuation CT and preventive interventions started after remission (CBT, MBCT) seem to have the largest differential effects for individuals that need them the most. Those who have the greatest risk for relapse and recurrence including patients with unstable remission, more previous episodes, potentially childhood trauma, early age of onset. These prescriptive indications, if confirmed in future research, may point the way to personalizing prevention strategies. Doing so, may maximize the efficiency with which they are applied and have the potential to target the mechanisms that appear to underlie these effects. This may help make this prevention strategies more efficacious. 
Major depression is a chronic and debilitating illness that effects approximately 1 in 5 people, but currently available treatments are limited by low rates of efficacy, therapeutic time lag, and undesirable side effects. Recent efforts have been directed towards investigating rapid-acting agents that reverse the behavioral and neuronal deficits of chronic stress and depression, notably the glutamate NMDA receptor antagonist ketamine. The cellular mechanisms underlying the rapid antidepressant actions of ketamine and related agents are discussed, as well as novel, selective glutamatergic receptor targets that are safer and have fewer side effects. 
Depression is a common complication of pregnancy and the postpartum period. There are multiple risk factors for peripartum mood disorders, most important of which is a prior history of depression. Both depression and antidepressant medications confer risk upon the infant. Maternal depression has been associated with preterm birth, low birth weight, fetal growth restriction, and postnatal cognitive and emotional complications. Antidepressant exposure has been associated with preterm birth, reductions in birth weight, persistent pulmonary hypertension, and postnatal adaptation syndrome (PNAS) as well as a possible connection with autism spectrum disorder. Paroxetine has been associated with cardiac malformations. Most antidepressant medications are excreted in low levels in breast milk and are generally compatible with breastfeeding. The use of antidepressants during pregnancy and postpartum must be weighed against the risk of untreated depression in the mother. 
How effective is supported computerised cognitive behaviour therapy (cCBT) as an adjunct to usual primary care for adults with depression?
Depression is a relatively common diagnosis in children and adolescents, and is associated with significant morbidity and suicidality in this population. Evidence-based treatment of the acute illness is imperative to try to prevent the development of treatment-resistant depression or other complications. In situations where response to acute treatment is inadequate, clinicians should first consider factors that may influence outcome, such as psychiatric or medical comorbidities, psychosocial stressors, and treatment noncompliance. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are the first-line treatment for depression in children and adolescents. For treatment-resistant depression, a switch to an alternate SSRI is recommended before trials of other antidepressants. Psychotherapy, such as cognitive behavioral therapy or interpersonal therapy, may improve treatment response. More research is needed examining medication augmentation strategies for treatment-resistant depression in children and adolescents. 
Effective, accessible, and affordable depression treatment is of high importance considering the large personal and economic burden of depression. Internet-based treatment is considered a promising clinical and cost-effective alternative to current routine depression treatment strategies such as face-to-face psychotherapy. However, it is not clear whether research findings translate to routine clinical practice such as primary or specialized mental health care. The E-COMPARED project aims to gain knowledge on the clinical and cost-effectiveness of blended depression treatment compared to treatment-as-usual in routine care.
Despite recent increased use of antidepressants in the United States, concerns persist that many adults with depression do not receive treatment, whereas others receive treatments that do not match their level of illness severity.
Update of the 2009 US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommendation on screening for depression in adults.
